Skip to main content
Search

 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
BOOKS
 
VIDEO
 
AUDIO
 
SOFTWARE
 
IMAGES
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "The Only Way Out Is Always Through the Police: A History of the 2020 New York Riots"
See other formats


THE ONLY WAY OUT 
IS ALWAYS THROUGH 
THE POLICE 


A HISTORY OF THE 2020 NEW YORK RIOTS WITH 
NO AUTHORS NOR MASTERS AS IT RELATES TO THE 
MATTER OF THE UNENDING POLICE VIOLENCE AND ALL 
THE FAILURES OF THOSE WHO HAVE WISHED TO END 
IT BUT HAVE NOT DONE SO FOR WHATEVER REASON 


THE ONLY WAY OUT 
IS ALWAYS THROUGH 
THE POLICE 


ABR 


A Fiistory of the 2020 NEw York Riots 


WITH 


No Authors nor Masters 
AS IT RELATES TO 
The Matter of the Unending Police Violence 


AND 


All the Failures of Those Who Have Wished 
to End It But Have Not Done So 


FOR 


Whatever Reason 


S@ DECEMBER 2020 @5 


Y here is a cop inside our heads, society is a power plant 
that runs on unwept tears, a new world is in our 
” hearts, which is a muscle the size of a fist. Build the 
commune, sabotage a railroad, distribute food not bombs, 
canvass for votes, or weep without tears while dumping your 
medications into the ocean and planting a radical urban gar- 
den, but know that these fantastic deeds are happening de- 
spite yourself, on a beach beneath a world ruined and paved 
with all of our past failures. 

Dead slogans from failed worlds carry heavy in the hearts 
of those with the resources and bandwidth to cast aside real- 
worldly matters as they sit and take their time to work things 
out within themselves. They murder imaginary cops inside 
their heads while real cops kick down real doors and smash 
real batons into everyone else's real bodies, drawing real 
blood and actually wept tears. Internalized racism, interper- 
sonal microaggressions, and problematic decolonial feminist 
transnational praxis all disappear in the path of an officer's 
night stick whose blow is fast approaching. 

Maybe our hearts and minds are good enough for the 
time being, despite the unfinished work. Maybe the reason 
no one ever finishes the work is because we've been internal- 
izing a struggle that was always meant to be external. We 
interrogate ourselves into a deep slouch as our neighbors en- 
dure the same kinds of suffering, which they've also been 
taught is their own fault: a war to be won or lost inside them- 
selves. Looking inward only gets you so far, and so far, here 






we are. 
Maybe the commune shouldn't seek to dissolve the ques- 
tion of needs but rather the question of nerds: nerds writing 
theory and visualizing data and making podcasts and spin- 
ning a world that continues to easily outrun its own collapse. 
Have you ever stopped and realized that you've just spent 
more time trying to read a boring long-form essay than it 
took a group of teenagers to destroy an entire business dis- 
trict and bring the largest city in the country to its knees? 


The history of resistance is a history of failure, in New 
York more than ever. Each new generation of resistance fails 
on its own terms, and maybe all one can hope for is to fail 
in less embarrassing ways than the previous generation, or to 
fail in less embarrassing ways than one failed just a few years 
earlier. Another world is out there, possibly, if we can ever 
finish humiliating ourselves. 

A new horizon of embarrassment awaits us. The truth 
is out there, somewhere beyond those police lines just up 
ahead. Maybe the truth is permanently out there and forever 
out of reach. We don't know for sure since we can only see 
what is just ahead of us, and the only way ahead is through 
the police. 

Riots are chaotic, a cascade of unfortunate events organi- 
cally spun out of control. The 2020 New York riots, or up- 
rising, or rebellion, or whatever people need to call it, spun 
out of control in its own way, just like in all the other cit- 
ies, but the explosion was contained and the world was put 
back together, just like in all the other cities. As coverage 
unfolded live across all platforms, the history of the riots in- 
stantly hardened into myth, so attempting an authoritative 
accounting of events definitely isn't the point, as if recorded 
truth even exists. Memories get flattened by time and some- 
one here needs to write things down before they forget. 


’ he rise of the social internet was accompanied by 
the need to render text illegible to computers. Au- 
=” tomated bots generating illicit or harmful traffic had 
emerged and become a threat to authentic communication. 
Computer scientists invented the Completely Automated 
Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart, or 
the captTcua. It was a test created by information security 
researchers and soon harnessed by tech companies as a fraud 
prevention tool. With the rise of hacker bot armies and the 
proliferation of internet proxies and TOR anonymization pro- 
tocols came the need to verify the legitimacy of information 





2 


communicated on the internet and, in turn, the legitimacy 
of the internet itself. 

CAPTCHAS were eventually monetized and implemented 
as recAPTCHAS, which extracted digital labor from users by 
having them verify the text in optically scanned books that 
computers were unable to recognize, or linking nouns and 
adjectives to photographs in order to improve image-search 
algorithms. Internet users helped computers become better 
recognition machines, which would ultimately benefit users 
who relied on computers to organize and index information 
for them. Users, relying on computers, relying on users, who 
relied on computers. But through this process, recapTCHAs 
would eventually turn into something with the power to re- 
shape the world itself. 

From the recarTcHa evolved the no-CAPTCHA-reCAPTCHA, 
which turned internet users with suspicious browsing pat- 
terns into teachers of artificial intelligence algorithms with 
applications that went far beyond database search aids. Users 
were now training autonomous self-driving cars to identify 
crosswalks, traffic lights, fire hydrants, buses, bicycles, stairs, 
bridges, mountains: the terrain of everyday life. Of course, 
no-CAPTCHA-reCAPTCHAs will never directly ask a human to 
identify other humans. 

Meanwhile, self-driving cars mow down a few pedestri- 
ans a year, though the accidents are usually blamed on the 
machines’ human overseers. The faulty mechanism that 
failed to identify the object in time was the human chaper- 
one inside, not any inherent problem in the technology it- 
self. Tech proponents cite the thousands of pedestrians killed 
each year by average people driving normal, nonautonomous 
vehicles. Autonomous or nonautonomous, human error was 
going to be killing us no matter what. 

As police department budgets swell, the intelligent tech- 
nologies we teach end up weaponized as robot surveillance 
dogs and crime prediction algorithms, early-adopted by po- 
lice who beta-test them in our neighborhoods. And while the 


manufacturers of those tools might claim their tech is pro- 
grammed to be unbiased, the very nature of policing is such 
that cops will never see their subjects as equals. They're all 
perps and suspects, not complete humans with unabridged 
rights. Even for the most progressive police commissioners, 
we're all just numbers and demographics, a wealth of data 
collected to make cities safer. 

Maybe our best protection against state violence begins 
with our own ability to identify who is human and who is 
not, and maybe it only works when the repression is met 
in real time in the real world when the stakes are at their 
highest. Is the cop beating you up a human? Are they a fire 
hydrant? Is their body-worn camera recording? Have they 
logged enough implicit bias training hours? Does the crime 
data justify this traffic stop? Have you checked all the boxes? 
Do you accept the cookies? 


ag ty he only way out of capitalism is through the police. 

My [he institution of policing is the most plainly un- 
derstood physical manifestation of the state and the 
entryway to all other branches of the criminal justice system. 
The police are something with which nearly every person 
in every city has interacted, no matter one's race or socio- 
economic status. If your skin is dark enough, you've likely 
already experienced state repression in the form of a pointless 
police stop. If you're white, you've probably at least observed 
it firsthand. 

Not everyone has experience dealing with unethical 
landlords, student debt, immigration documents, subprime 
mortgages, homelessness, union busting, natural gas pipeline 
construction, or even climate change, which can often feel 
like an abstraction. But the weight of any social justice issue 
is instantly felt once the cops finally move in to enforce the 
laws that keep those unjust conditions in place. 

We're taught that state bureaucracy and legislative inef- 
ficiency are the main barriers to change, but then, under the 





4 


paperwork, the beach. After the petitions and boycotts and 
legislative efforts all fail and the suffering continues unbro- 
ken, passive outrage escalates to active disruption, which is 
always met with state repression whenever it begins to find 
success. Perhaps we simply haven't traveled far enough down 
the road. As the French protest slogan goes, “tout le monde 
déteste la police.” Everyone hates the police, though maybe 
here in America they just didn't know it yet. 

Maybe social reality was a distorted text that people 
were unable to recognize on their own. The puzzle had to be 
solved for them, optically. In the streets across all of urban 
America in late May and early June 2020, it felt like everyone 
really did hate the police. Everyone was finally done signing 
petitions and looking inward and waiting for change. Out 
of isolation and into the streets, hatred of police was the one 
thing we all had in common. In the streets was where we 
verified what was real and what was not. This was the test the 
state could not pass. This was the way out of our unbearable, 
embarrassing present. 


n the late 1990s and early 2000s, the American 
antiglobalization movement blossomed. Through 
~ circumstance and skilled organizing, autonomous 
leftist networks found common cause with a fast-shrinking 
trade unionist movement, joining forces to fight for eco- 
nomic justice. Anarchists and assembly-line workers went 
on field trips to disrupt free-trade conferences and business 
meetings of the world's most powerful people. Creating me- 
dia spectacles and getting beat up by police across the con- 
tinent, they forged a tenuous model of public engagement 
that came to be known as “protest tourism.” Like anything 
that makes people sincere, there was a lot to make fun of, but 
at least they were trying. 
It wasn't total delusion. Marching alongside big labor 
coalitions, the reveries and calls for old-fashioned general 
strikes that would shut down the country seemed to actually 


carry some weight. Unless, that is, the unions were just using 
all these idealistic young protesters to float their own sinking 
ships before finally disappearing as a political force. 

Either way, 9/11 slowed all momentum. The atomic 
Patriot Act was enacted in bipartisan unanimity with near- 
universal popular support. Repression of anticapitalist move- 
ments accelerated at both local and federal levels, building 
upon the rFB1's old obsession with Earth and Animal Lib- 
eration Front-style resistance, which was now officially ter- 
rorism. Setting fire to a construction site, spray-painting an 


animal testing lab, freeing mink into the wild: all tiny 9/11s. 

Aboveboard anti-imperialist organizing culminated in 
the 2003 anti-Iraq-War marches, the self-proclaimed “larg- 
est protest event in human history” that brought millions of 
people into the streets across dozens of countries simultane- 
ously. It didn't work, at all, but making it into a book of 
world records seemed to be enough of an accomplishment 
for the organizers, mostly leftover baby boomers who had 
failed to stop a different imperialist war three decades earlier 
using similar tactics. 

Unlike the narcissist boomers of the 1960s, the bulk of 
the antiglobalization-era leftists didn't turn to new-age self- 
help wellness scams, literal cults, or, worse, electoral politics. 
This time around, radical networks proved more resilient. 
Autonomous organizing easily adapted to the rise of the open 
internet and its grand vision of a decentralized space for social 
connection: a place for friends. Those who became lost could 
find others on the internet and continue to stay in touch and 
organize. They didn't have to search for fulfillment in cultish 
human potential seminars that promised to maximize one's 
productivity and craft a more perfect individual who would 
craft a more perfect capitalism that would somehow, some- 
day, work for everyone. The tech-utopian gimmick of the 
internet quickly fell away, but the rise of monolithic social 
media platforms was still better than whatever miseries the 
boomer leftists embraced after their stars fell. 


Lica 
© 
a) 


<a y POLICE 


( NYPD SHIELD ey 


COUNTERING TERRORISM through INFORMATION SHARING 





Tactics, Radicalization, and Violence 


| Protests and Deliberate Escalation 


Heightened Sense of Conflict Injuries and Deaths 
lJ 


| Rationalization of Violence 





Property Destruction is a “Pure” Act Property Destruction is “Non-Violent” 
1) 





| Communes and Squats 


Building the “New Society” Underground Echo Chamber 
1} 








| Increasing Levels of Violence 








Dehumanization of Victims Increasing Degree of Violence 


As the years passed, law and order thrived, and by the 
end of the decade the New York Police Department had 
killed over a hundred people, closer to two hundred if kill- 
ings by off-duty cops were included. Resistance against the 
state continued, failing over and over, a little bit better each 
time. Among myriad other activity, there was a disrupted 
world economic summit, a disastrous political convention, 
endless anti-war demonstrations, some university occupa- 
tions, an army recruitment center bombing (still unsolved), 
a massive expansion of the nypp's intelligence division, the 
rise of stop-and-frisk, an autocratic mayor who kept getting 
re-elected, an economic recession, and then, in 2011, Oc- 
cupy Wall Street. 

Occupy only really captured headlines after some in- 
nocent-looking white girls got pepper sprayed by cops dur- 
ing a peaceful march in Lower Manhattan. The nypp had 
been brutalizing non-white people forever, of course, but 
white-on-white police violence against peaceful protesters in 
Greenwich Village, the graveyard of all the old white radicals 
who burned out and inherited their parents’ multimillion- 


7 


dollar townhouses, was just too much to stomach. A huge 
mass arrest event on the Brooklyn Bridge the following week 
kept Occupy on the front pages. 

The whole world was watching, again, and the cover- 
age seemed to be driven by direct confrontations with the 
police, not costumed activists doing media stunts in front 
of the New York Stock Exchange or passive crowds march- 
ing around chanting slogans. The Occupy encampment was 
eventually put down in a midnight shower of pepper spray, 
but police did a better job of keeping photojournalists away 
from that one. 

During the two months in 2011 that Zuccotti Park was 
occupied, the nypp killed three people across the city, in- 
cluding an 87-year-old Baptist minister out for his morning 
stroll when he was run down by a speeding police cruiser. In 
2012, they broke their own record and killed 21 people, 19 
of them Black or Latino. 

Among the worst was Tamon Robinson, also run down, 
this time for the crime of stealing rocks from the grounds of 
a public housing project. The cops claimed that Robinson 
had effectively killed himself during the chase by running 
into their stationary vehicle, causing him to fall and hit his 
head on the ground. The decentralized Black Lives Matter 
movement soon emerged nationwide and intensified locally 
in 2013 after police in East Flatbush fatally shot 16-year-old 
Kimani Gray three times in the back and then choked Eric 
Garner to death in 2014. 

The remnants of Occupy, mostly non-Black, played 
minor supporting roles as BLM grew. But the crowds at the 
more confrontational protests were primarily younger Black 
people, or “Black proletarians,” as the academics liked to 
say, along with all of the teenagers. The self-anointed “lead- 
ers” of Black Lives Matter who seized the microphones and 
jockeyed for the spotlight were clearly full of shit, doing Tv 
appearances, registering trademarks, filing for nonprofit sta- 
tus. Despite all that, Black youth were out on the streets, 


masked up and making their problems known, no matter 
what the activists and politicians were yelling through their 
megaphones at the front. 

Protests after the killing of Kimani Gray were deemed 
“miniriots” by the news due to some limited looting and 
street resistance that had taken the nypp by surprise. Why 
were people chanting “NYPD SUCK MY DICK” and shout- 
ing vulgarities in their faces all night instead of “no justice, 
no peace” and going home? Why wasn't anyone submitting 
to their arrests? Where were their leaders? Where were the 
calm heads with whom they could negotiate? 

The department kept getting worse and bigger as the 
progressives in power continued increasing its headcount and 
operating budget. The general political strategy was to make 
up for the defunding of essential social services by increasing 
the funding and the purview of the only city agency that 
would never be defunded: the police. Activists organized, 
they walked around with clipboards, they got media expo- 
sure, they raised awareness, and everything stayed the same. 

The nypp infiltrated everyday life more and more as they 
gradually absorbed government functions that had nothing 
to do with policing. Police were now feeding the poor, do- 
ing homeless outreach, opening playgrounds, running af- 
terschool sTEM education programs, conducting Narcan 
training, teaching financial literacy, running résumé-writing 
workshops, hosting church breakfasts, collecting e-waste, fix- 
ing flats, microchipping pets, mentoring at-risk youth. New 
“neighborhood policing” initiatives turned cops into social 
workers with guns, guidance counselors with guns, janitors 
with guns, preachers with guns. Cops weren't cops, they 
were community advocates empowered to use violence to 
keep neighborhoods quiet, calm, and orderly. 

In return, the Nypp received unlimited funding to en- 
hance their brand and dig their hooks even deeper into the 
neighborhoods it oversaw. Why install creepy surveillance 
cameras everywhere when you could just set up a protection 


racket granting you access to the security cameras of every 
local business? Why plant obvious reminders of state repres- 
sion on every street corner when you could just persuade 
local shops and landlords to link their own camera feeds di- 
rectly to the police? 

But it's the 21st century; the police aren't the mafia. 
This protection racket extorts the city, not small businesses. 
And the payments don't come in cash stuffed in envelopes, 
it's delivered in budget line items and political capital, in- 
creasing their power to decide how these communities are 
run. Park curfews are strictly enforced in certain neighbor- 
hoods but not in others. Sidewalk barbeques and street par- 
ties are monitored and harassed in some areas while others 
are left alone. Police profile communal gatherings and decide 
when and where socializing is allowed. They vertically patrol 
public housing and turn dark stairwells into shooting gal- 
leries. They control the flows of traffic. They regulate the 
way people move through and exist in public space. The city 
belonged to them, they thought. 







Y eorge Floyd died under the knee of Minneapolis 
fy cop Derek Chauvin on May 25th, 2020. Panic and 
=>” uncertainty over the novel coronavirus was still 
leading the news and the streets had all but emptied of peo- 
ple. Police across the U.S. were still somehow killing people 
at a rate of about three per day, so it wasn't clear whether this 
would just be another in a long line of police killings caught 
on camera, passing through the public eye, fully normalized. 

Some minor local protests commenced, all “orderly,” as 
the Nypp refers to demonstrations where nothing happens. 
People chant the usual chants, walk around for a few hours, 
end with some speeches, and everyone goes home and up- 
loads their photos. It looked like George Floyd might just be 
one more name to add to the spreadsheet of the dead. 


10 


MAY 28 


eorge Floyd was killed on a Monday and the video 
took a day or two to really circulate. As outrage 
= built, the situation in Minneapolis escalated and 
full rioting broke out two days later on May 27th, with strik- 
ing images of entire city blocks on fire making the rounds. 

The following day, a couple hundred New Yorkers at- 
tended a hastily organized afternoon protest in Union Square 
Park in Manhattan. Things were loose and trending disorder- 
ly. The usual activists and megaphones hadn't shown up in 
full force; maybe they were busy planning bigger demonstra- 
tions and drafting press releases and confirming politicians’ 
availability. The usual communist groups that glommed on 
and took over things also hadn't gathered in any meaningful 
way. The city was just a few months into the pandemic, ev- 
erything was shut down, and people were still afraid of being 
outside their homes. 

The ones who did show up looked like mostly unaffiliat- 
ed anti-police sympathizers and some leftists, plus a contin- 
gent of teens who were always hanging out downtown any- 
way. The nypp, cognizant of Minneapolis, had surrounded 
the entire park with cops. As the crowd got worked up at the 
sight of them, police eventually moved in and started push- 
ing and yelling at people to get away from the street. They 
began making violent preemptive arrests, targeting anyone 
within reach. Bike cops in hi-viz jerseys skidded in and threw 
their mountain bikes into people's faces, sending protesters 
stumbling backwards onto the ground. 

The crowd fled the park and defended themselves as 
best as they could with whatever was at hand: empty plastic 
bottles, miscellaneous trash, and, at one pivotal moment, a 
large plastic garbage can that police would later describe as 
the most violent of protest tools. It floated through the air 
and landed on a cop's head, bonk, and the trash inside flew 
out and rained down over the other cops. 





II 


All of the items were thrown in self-defense against a 
group of clearly out-of-control jock cops blindly swinging 
their batons at the air in front of them and lunging, not at 
anything in particular, just lunging. The crowd was too ag- 
gressive and the Nypp's trademark snatch-and-grab arrests 
weren't scaring and dispersing protesters the way they usually 
did. Whiteshirt commanders on the scene looked frustrated. 

The crowd proceeded to march a few miles around the 
city and down to City Hall, everyone getting picked off and 
beaten and arrested along the way. This was protocol with 
any disorderly protest that happens here. Police later cited 
72 arrests, which sounded a lot like a mass arrest given the 
relatively small size of the crowd, but it apparently didn't 
count since the arrests had been spaced out over the course 
of the march. It was all just precision policing, 72 surgical 
strikes taking out only the high-value agitators, no innocent 
civilians harmed. 

Local media stuck to their usual language. People had 
“taken to the streets to demonstrate against police brutality 
in the wake of a black man's death in Minneapolis,” passive 
voice. A death occurred, a demonstration took place, arrests 
were made. 

Meanwhile, rioting in Minnesota continued to escalate 
as locals took over, looted, and set fire to a police station. 
A New York tabloid plastered its cover the next day with 
the headline “BURNING MAD.” It wasn't a reference to 
protesters burning down the Third Precinct; it was an article 
about the owner of a Staten Island tanning salon who was 
angry about coronavirus lockdown rules. 


MAY 29 


mages of Minneapolis in the throes had spread ev- 
, erywhere now, and local news was spilling a lot of 
wS ink about the fragility of police-community rela- 
tions. Things felt uneasy on the streets and in the parks as the 





12 


as 


<, 
De LO 7. 


WZ 


y 
b 
y 


a 
\ 
k 


of 2S £7 TS 





Nypp mobilized as many cops as they could spare in prepara- 
tion for more protests. After years of easy crowd control jobs, 
leadership hadn't expected the moderate level of resistance 
they had seen the day before. A typical whiteshirt with twen- 
ty-plus years on the job would have seen his colleagues kill 
hundreds of people during his tenure and nothing beyond 
a few “miniriots” had ever occurred. Some dead perp out in 
the Midwest, just another name to add to the list. 

The way demonstrations in New York usually went was: 
NYPD gives peaceful marchers a few wide avenues they can 
“shut down” for a little bit, activists pose on some steps some- 
where and get the photos they need and the video the local 
news wants, and then everyone goes home to see if whatever 
they posted is doing numbers. The wrinkle this day was that 
two big demonstrations had been called instead of one, and 
the evening protest was going to be in Brooklyn, where the 
majority of the city actually lives. It was also a Friday, a tem- 
perate spring day, 72 degrees, overcast. 

The call was to meet in front of Barclays Center, a large 
sports arena bordered on one side by a busy thoroughfare 
and on the other by smaller streets that police were now us- 
ing as staging areas. The triangular plaza in front of the arena 
was located directly on top of a fortified transit hub that was 
already teeming with cops on a normal day. It seemed like a 
very bad place to hold a demonstration. Yet hundreds, even- 
tually thousands, began arriving. 

As huge numbers of cops amassed on all sides, the ac- 
tivists shouted out their old slogans. One familiar chant 
emerged away from the megaphones, though, and it would 
end up becoming the central unifying chant over the coming 
days: “NYPD SUCK MY DICK.” The teens started it, obvi- 
ously—the pitch of the voices was about an octave higher 
than it was for all the other chants. The activists tried to 
get everyone to change it to “NYPD KKK,” but it wouldn't 
take. 


14 


The official people and official organizations tried to do 
their thing, shouting worn-out platitudes into everybody's 
faces: no justice, no peace, shut it down, arrest killer cops, 
fire killer cops, prosecute, indict, reform, resist, vote, and so 
on. A giant digital billboard built into the Barclays Center fa- 
cade cycled through ads for car insurance and Doritos, pixel 
wiping, over and over. 

As an hour or two passed and nothing happened, people 
were getting bored and things gradually became less orderly 
as the crowd continued to grow. The official protest leaders 
who had originally called for the protest were fading into 
the background, irrelevant, and the Nypp whiteshirts were 
scrambling around behind the frontlines trying to figure out 
what to do with the crowd. The big protest from Manhattan 
had come over the bridge and pushed in, surrounding the 
area and compromising the Nypp's careful perimeter. 

The awkward plaza in front of Barclays was not de- 
signed as a public gathering space. Developers had originally 
planned to build an office tower there but abandoned their 
plans when the recession hit. It was a flat, empty, paved space 
with nothing but a weird grassy architectural fake hillside 
feature built into part of it. People were spilling out into the 
surrounding roadways, and, as everyone who's ever been 
arrested at a New York protest knows, the roads are lava: 
grounds for an immediate disorderly conduct arrest. 

At some point, after hours of verbal abuse from a di- 
verse crowd that technically wasn't doing anything wrong, 
the whiteshirts in front of the Barclays entrance panicked 
and gave the order to push their metal crowd control bar- 
ricades into protesters and shove them away from the arena. 
The crowd pushed back, hard, and cops doused everyone at 
the front with pepper spray, aiming high so the rows beyond 
would get a taste, too. Some teens at the rear started climb- 
ing up the steep hillside, trying to get away from the cops 
who were now rushing in from the sides. Frustrated cops 


5 


slipped on the grass and shouted at them to come down as 
they tangled with the rest of the agitators below. 

Something was on fire down in the plaza and dark smoke 
was rising over the scene. Teens were swinging their skate- 
boards over their heads at something that sounded metal. 
The crowd control barricades were thrown back at police 
lines and a large steel sign with a map of the neighborhood 
and points of interest on it, installed when the arena was 
built, had been ripped down and heaved at advancing cops 
who were already ducking and dodging a hail of steady air- 
mail. 

Nypp skirmish lines were thinning as they took shots 
to the head, walked into mists of their own pepper spray, 
and desperately tried to hold onto their arrestees. They gave 
up on the snatch-and-grabs and removed their batons and 
swung them everywhere, trying to create some space. All 
they could do at this point was just keep everyone away from 
them. One cop hit a fleeing protester with enough force to 
split his wooden baton in half. Somewhere in the distance, 
fireworks were exploding. 

Police did not have control of the situation, Black 
Lives Matter activists did not have control of the situation, 
Marxist-Leninist-Maoist front groups did not have control of 
the situation, and anarchist agitators definitely did not have 
control of the situation. The teens also did not have control 
of the situation, which is to say they were in their element. 
Police kept pushing further out as the crowd tripped into 
the surrounding streets. As the police perimeter expanded 
into the roadways, firecrackers exploded around their feet as 
they jumped and shielded their faces. The sound of shatter- 
ing glass echoed through the plaza. The chaos was official. 
The police were no longer in control. 

A large breakaway group of protesters decided that they 
were done getting beat up and found themselves pushing 
through a loosened police perimeter, flowing away from the 
arena, away from all the people aiming their phone cameras 


16 





and crying “shame” without end. Militants began pushing 
traffic barriers into the roadways and everyone else immedi- 
ately joined in to help push things into place. 

The massive Nypp mobilization meant that their vehi- 
cles were scattered all over the area and they became instant 
targets. One of the first ones was an empty suv whose rear 
window shattered with a tap. A younger protester picked up 
a large object, wound up, and threw a fastball through the 
remaining part of the glass. Some accelerant went in and 
within seconds the interior was in flames. 

The spandex bike cops rode in about thirty seconds too 
late and formed a protective circle around their burning ve- 
hicle. They froze and awaited instructions from their cap- 
tains as hundreds of disorderly leftists and poc youth stood 
nearby, heckling them, amassing numbers as all the people 
fleeing the violence at Barclays turned corners and ran to join 
them. 

Dark clouds had moved over Brooklyn and a light rain 
came and went. Barclays Center was in the distance, still 
surrounded by hundreds of cops, its digital billboard glow- 
ing like a shitty spectre. Perhaps half of the original crowd, 
mostly the peaceful ones, had marooned themselves at the 
arena or headed home, probably for the best. 


T} 


= EMBLEMHEA 
DEAN ENTRANCE 
ADIDAS : 
NETSSHop (J 


PACIFIC PARK 
SA SSG 





Graffiti had occurred, windows had become broken, 
things were catching fire. The group of thousands was finally 
dispersing, but not in the way the police wanted. Unmanage- 
able groups both large and small with no singular identity 
following no particular tactic had broken apart and flowed 
into the surrounding neighborhood like a tide, shooting 
north in the direction of gentrified Fort Greene. 

Fort Greene had been a majority Black neighborhood 
for most of the 20th century but was now a shining example 
of the new wave of Brooklyn gentrification that had begun 
near the turn of the millennium. The historic neighborhood 
was upzoned with empty promises of affordable housing and 
Class A office space, which would bring a new surge of glass- 
wrapped real estate that would lift all property value and at- 
tract corporations and high-income earners alike. 

Developers and politicians planted a huge modernist 
sports arena at the bottom of it all, like the dot in an excla- 
mation mark. The Barclays Center is a massive toilet seat of 
a building, deliberately corroded with a decorative rust that 
drips down when it rains and permanently stains the side- 


18 


walk below a burnt orange hue. At once shiny and rusting, 
Fort Greene is now majority white, a salted field of blue- 
tinted glass sprouting six billion dollars worth of poured con- 
crete and steel into the sky, tax-exempt. 

The unruly crowd swiftly spread into the area, refract- 
ing through the collapsing wall of cops like a prism, or a cat 
squeezing past a door left ajar, shoving through and throwing 
the police perimeter wide open. Property destruction con- 
tinued and anything with Nyep markings was tagged and 
smashed. Piles of garbage on adjacent blocks were spontane- 
ously catching fire and plumes of smoke floated through the 
area, clogging scanner traffic and sending a general ambience 
of civil unrest through the pretty brownstone-lined streets. 

Spectacular video out of Minneapolis the previous night 
showed a Target department store looted and then engulfed 
in flames. Target Corp, a well-known financier of right-wing 
political causes, was based in Minneapolis, so it was a fitting 
target. There was actually a Target a few blocks away from 
Barclays, but in the wrong direction. A commercial-grade 
pile of garbage behind it was set on fire anyway, in solidarity. 





An errant Target shopping cart was later discovered nearby 
and filled with trash, which was lit on fire and pushed along- 
side the march until one of its wheels gave out and it was 
abandoned, melting, in solidarity. Someone on the wrong 
side of history came out of a million-dollar brownstone and 
hosed it down. 

It was impossible to measure the size of the crowd as 
people fanned out, dropped out, or joined in along the 
way. Marked and unmarked police cars double parked in 
the street were getting wrecked, leaving behind scenes that 
looked like the aftermath of a car crash. Perhaps a thousand 
people were marching along the edge of Fort Greene Park, 
forcing unprepared cops at the intersections ahead to huddle 
and pull back. 

One whiteshirt stayed behind to make a last stand to 
save his precious van, but a protester ran up with a chunk 
of concrete, leapt off their feet, and did a Michael Jordan 
spread-eagle slam dunk directly into the center of the wind- 
shield with the captain standing just a few feet away. Already 
becoming surrounded, he gave chase, hesitated, then turned 
and fled. Soon, another van along the park became fully in- 
volved and eventually totaled as everyone cheered, or gawked 
at least. Some fireworks found their way onto the back seat, 
and the sparks caught. 

It wasn't the first or even second nypp vehicle lit on 
fire that night, but it was the one that got the most atten- 
tion, probably because fire looked nicer at night and because 
police had admitted defeat and abandoned the area, reliev- 
ing tension and alllowing everyone to relax a little. People 
recklessly posed for photographs, celebrated, howled, or just 
stared and smiled. 

There was no fearsome black bloc with uniforms and 
goggles and homemade shields, no special tactical forma- 
tions, no secret encrypted communications networks coor- 
dinating protester movements. And though the militant re- 
sistance that evening was kicked off by people of color back 


20 





at the arena responding to brutal police violence, the crowd 
that had ended up around the van bonfire was exceptionally 
diverse, perhaps the most multiracial demonstration in New 
York City history, united solely by their hatred of police. 

The nypp had been forced to keep their distance for 
hours now as the crowd degentrified the neighborhood and 
lowered property value. Cops were standing just a few blocks 
away on an incline with a perfect view of their vehicle on fire 
and their precinct area trashed. Police unions would claim 
that the cowardly higher-ups had forced cops on the ground 
to back off, but that wasn't true. Any cop who got close was 
physically attacked and sent back either injured or ducking 
for cover. 

The specialized disorder control units with their bikes 
and scooters and armor must have been deployed somewhere 
else, or maybe the commanders realized that their hundred- 
million-dollar riot control teams were useless in the face of 
an actual riot. Meanwhile, all the normal uniformed officers 
filling the gaps kept getting injured by flying objects, so they 
had been issued large riot shields that they clearly were not 
trained to use, awkwardly wielding them around like sheets 
of heavy corrugated steel. 


21 





Around the same time as the bonfire at Fort Greene Park, 
a large breakaway group in nearby gentrified Clinton Hill was 
attempting to storm the 88th Precinct, a castle-like fortress 
built in the 19th century. This would have seemed extremely 
foolish just a few days earlier, but seeing Minneapolis fall and 
hearing all the rumors coming in about uprisings happening 
in other cities, anything seemed possible now. 

The precinct was surrounded and vandalized and the 
crowd tried to rush the doors, but cops beat and pepper 
sprayed them back. Instead of abandoning the station like 
police in Minneapolis had done, the cops trapped inside had 
sent a call over the radio for a mobilization equivalent to the 
response for a full-scale terrorist attack, rushing in hundreds 
of cops from neighboring precincts to protect the building. 
The crowd was pushed back and the fearless ones at the front 
arrested and yanked inside to be processed. The outside of 
the station and its windows were wrecked, along with the po- 
lice cars lining the sidewalks. Scores of cops flooded into the 
area, uncoordinated, waiting for direction, trying to block 
off streets they had already lost, all turned around, angry, 


confused. 


22; 





It was rounding midnight and people who had been ar- 
rested earlier in the day at Barclays were getting released, 
texting and asking where the party was. The main chant fill- 
ing the streets was still the nongendered “NYPD SUCK MY 
DICK,” which was fine. Resistance continued into the night 
in small pockets, especially around the 79th Precinct in Bed- 
Stuy and back in Fort Greene at the Ingersoll Houses proj- 
ects, which police had been terrorizing for decades. 

The highest-profile arrests of the riots occurred later in 
two separate instances of botched molotov attacks, one of 
them on a van full of cops, captured on cell phone video, and 
the other on an empty police vehicle, captured in an almost 
comically incriminating Weegee-style flash photograph that 
made all the papers. 


MAY 30 


“gag he sun rose over Brooklyn and the ashes of burned 
cop cars dusted the streets and shattered glass 

© crunched underfoot. It felt like things had never 
ended the previous day, like the events were all still unfold- 





23 


ing live. Reading the news wasn't necessary when you could 
just walk outside and see for yourself what was happening; 
just head to any popular outdoor gathering spot and see if 
anything was getting out of hand, or follow the police he- 
licopters. The only outside news you needed to know was 
that what was happening here was happening everywhere in 
every big city across the country, decentralized, organic, and 
leaderless. Institutions were being set on fire, statues were be- 
ing torn down, territory was being reclaimed, and the police 
were finally feeling the consequences of what they had done. 

Over the past 24 hours, Nypp vehicles had been speeding 
all over Brooklyn, narrowly missing protesters and pedestri- 
ans alike as they barrelled down side streets and drove up 
and down curbs. They were mostly driving with their lights 
and sirens off, trying not to attract attention since all police 
vehicles were being targeted now, even the ones that weren't 
empty. 

Police were using their vehicles as crowd dispersal weap- 
ons, pushing through groups of marchers and forcing people 
to dive out of their way. Cops in unmarked cars were cruising 
around and swinging their doors open to knock down errant 
protesters as they sped by. It was no accident that the lasting 
images from the riots here were of cop cars on fire, or cop 
cars with all of their windows smashed, or cop cars covered 
in tags, or cop cars being danced upon. 

Video of two Nypp suvs slowly plowing through a crowd 
of protesters in gentrified Prospect Heights in Brooklyn was 
getting millions of views online. Most of the police violence 
over the past day was face-to-face: cops taking baseball swings 
at people with their batons, throwing steel bike barricades 
into people's faces, repeatedly punching protesters’ heads as 
they piled on top of them, pepper spraying state legislators, 
breaking bones, causing seizures, shoving the elderly onto 
sidewalk asphalt. But two videos of the suvs accelerating 
through the crowd, shot at a distance and from above, were 
the ones that got the most media outrage that weekend. 


24 


Around the same time, a third NyppD suv was menacing 
people on a nearby side street until someone shattered its rear 
window with the edge of a metal garbage can. Other assorted 
missiles followed, and then people came in swinging skate- 
boards at the side windows, ramming the vehicle with bike 
barricades, and tossing metal outdoor dining chairs at it. In- 
stead of revving through the protesters, the driver performed 
a quick three-point turn and sped away, back from wherever 
it came. No one got run over; everyone cheered. 

Meanwhile, the usual activist groups were trying to capi- 
talize, posting online flyers for conventional protests at the 
usual locations around the city. No one really knew how 
those turned out because people had stopped paying atten- 
tion to that old chain of command. What brought youth of 
color and leftists out to a specific area was word-of-mouth, 
not some nonprofit issuing a press statement telling everyone 
to be in a certain place at a certain time. 

So now it was Saturday and Flatbush was a hotspot. Just 
like the day before, a scheduled protest had gotten out of 
control after aggressive cops had started making arbitrary 
violent arrests. It evolved into a tense standoff with police 
penned in by hundreds of people at one intersection and 
another crowd one block over penning them in on the other 
side, sticking them in a kettle of their own making. All the 
surrounding streets were lined with cop cars that were all 
tagged or smashed, each and every one. Residents watching 
from their stoops and out their windows heckled. Heaps of 
airmail were being thrown, glass shattering, orange traffic 
cones flying overhead. The exact goal here wasn't clear, but 
whatever was happening, everyone was feeling good about it 
and no one was going to be stopping anytime soon. 

Police couldn't muster enough reinforcements to deal 
with the Flatbush crowd, which meant that things must 
have been breaking out all over the city. Maybe too many 
cops were calling in sick or were simply opting out, since 
this wasn't the kind of easy overtime they were used to. In a 


25 


desperate attempt to clear the area, an Nypp helicopter de- 
scended and hovered about 50 feet off the ground, angling 
down and blowing dirt and debris from an adjacent lot into 
people's faces and bending tree branches from the force of 
the wind. It all just made people more angry, especially since 
this was a residential area, not some corporate plaza or river- 
front highway or Manhattan park. A lot of the people out- 
side yelling at the cops lived right there. 





26 


A rumor spread that the blowhard president of the police 
officers’ union was somewhere nearby, visiting station houses 
around the borough and trying to boost morale among the 
troops, who were obviously losing. The mayor was attempt- 
ing to do the same, accompanied by a media entourage. 
Search parties were assembled, to no avail. 

Back in Flatbush, the sun had set and another nypp ve- 
hicle was engulfed and surrounded by revelers. Hundreds of 
teens and other locals were celebrating, posing for photos in 
front of the flames and doing ill-advised live broadcasts for 
their friends. Someone drove right up to the unrest, got out 
of their car, opened all the doors and blared a Pop Smoke 
song as the cop car smoldered. A line of police were well 
within sight, looking on but unable to do anything. They 
eventually rushed and were quickly beaten and pushed back, 
shooting pepper spray to create space and make their escape. 
The helicopter came back, but no one cared. An mta bus had 
been abandoned in the intersection for some reason. Some- 
one climbed on top so the pilot could more clearly see their 
raised middle fingers. 

Unlike the Brooklyn street party, something with a more 
overtly political bent seemed to be unfolding over in Lower 
Manhattan. A crowd of hundreds was heading downtown, 
marching and shouting and approaching Soho, the upscale 
shopping district. It was a motley and spontaneous alliance 
of poc youth and black-clad radicals. Everyone was working 
together without any leaders telling them what to do or what 
was allowed and what was not. The balance of teenaged crews 
and more familiar-looking militants looked nearly even. 

Big store windows and historic facades along Broadway 
were initially getting tagged with the usual leftist scrawl but 
eventually the windows became smashed, no slogans, and a 
few people had proper hammers this time. All the garbage 
along the way was thrown into the streets and lit on fire. 
Anything with an nypp logo on it was tagged, smashed, and, 


like the other garbage, set alight. 


27 


Broadway became a kind of assembly line of property 
destruction. A few intrepid teens began venturing inside the 
corporate chain stores instead of just breaking the windows. 
The first ones in bypassed the cheap clothing up front and 
headed straight for the cash registers. The crowd's tastes 
turned more upscale when the march reached the part of 
Soho with the overpriced streetwear and designer names. 
There were no cops in sight. Every store was getting hit. 

There was some minor looting back in 2013 after Kimani 
Gray was killed, but that was basically just people flash mob- 
bing a Rite Aid and a few other stores and running from the 
cops. This was sustained and it was happening in some of the 
country's richest zip codes. It wasn't a quick outburst and a 
footchase. It wasn't clear where the police even were. 

Incidentally, since there were no cops around, this felt 
like possibly the safest protest in the history of New York 
City protests. A police van creeped up to the rear of the 
march and had something heavy tossed at it, crushing the 
windshield. The cop driving it immediately got out and be- 
gan striding forward, paused, assessed the situation, and re- 
turned to their van and just sat there, waiting. 





28 








Some kids busted into a cvs and ran out clutching a cash 
register drawer. An empty police suv was covered in tags and 
its windows smashed and sides dented in, obscuring a pair of 
cops who were hiding behind it with their guns drawn down 
by their sides. Maybe this wasn't the safest protest in the his- 
tory of New York City protests. The march moved on, pass- 
ing by a smoldering Nypp van that must have been set on fire 
hours before, and then it just kept on going north, forever. 


MAY 31 


Whe rioting had jumped from historically Black 
; Brooklyn to white, moneyed Manhattan, and now 
the activists with megaphones had a new mission: 
to convey an idealized image of protesters as peaceful and 
respectable and nonviolent, and to re-assert their monopoly 
on lawbreaking spectacle. If people were going to be disobey- 
ing laws en masse, it would have to be organized under some 
kind of centralized authority with media outreach, police 
coordination, tightly controlled optics, and lots and lots of 
speeches. 





29 


Activists peacefully marched back and forth across the 
city all afternoon, crossing bridges, shutting down empty 
highways, shouting ancient social justice slogans. People had 
started making big deals about “Black-led” protests, which 
seemed to be code for cop-friendly marches led by shallow, 
brand-oriented Black activists with raised fist logos and social 
media audiences to grow. They were constantly calling them- 
selves “revolutionaries” like a vintage documentary, except a 
terrible reboot that had the protagonists holding hands with 
cops instead of posing with rifles on courthouse steps. 

One of the big Black-led protests started out in Lower 
Manhattan, incidentally in front of the city's most promi- 
nent courthouses. So-called “protest leaders” literally held 
hands with whiteshirted police captains and both sides 
joined together and chanted “peaceful protest” at a bank of 
news cameras. It could have been worse: images of another 
Black-led protest in Brooklyn showed a deeply embarrassing 
basketball-themed march in which demonstrators stoically 
dribbled basketballs down the street while chanting “We. 
Are Not. A Threat.” 





30 


The big march eventually ended up back in Brooklyn 
at the Barclays Center, as if they were trying to perform a 
nonviolent do-over of the rioting two days before. A Black 
protest leader stood at the frontlines with their back to the 
police holding a sign that read “ORGANIZED ANGER 
SPEAKS LOUDER’ and aimed it at protesters. The back of 
the sign, facing the police, was blank. 

A group of Black girls was yelling obscenities at some 
cops and an older Black man argued with them until he fi- 
nally blurted out, rhetorically, “man why are you so mad?” 
A Black woman spoke through a mobile public address sys- 
tem urging people to dial back their rage because, she said, 
“screaming will never get you heard.” A Latino man gave in- 
terviews to reporters while patrolling the crowd and rooting 
out suspicious “antifa” members wearing telltale black cloth- 
ing. Unofficial peace marshals threw their bodies in front of 
the Target store, urging marchers not to loot it. 

Someone with their back to the cops pleaded, “don't give 
them a reason to shoot us,” to which somebody else retorted, 
“they're already shooting us.” No one was allowed to yell 
vulgarities or hurl insults at the police. In fact, all of the cops 
were just a “distraction” from the real protest work. The ac- 
tual aim, it seemed, was to yell at other protesters, not the 
police. 

The protest leaders got what they asked for. As demon- 
strators of various races and ethnicities yelled at each other 
about the virtues of violence versus nonviolence, hundreds 
of riot cops surrounded the area and moved in, beating ev- 
eryone with batons, making rough arrests, and successfully 
dispersing the divided crowd. 

Back in Manhattan, Union Square was slowly filling up 
with hundreds of Black youth, along with a few hundred 
less-Black radicals. The riot squad showed up, unarmored, 
riding mountain bikes and scooters, ready to continue do- 


31 


ing easy traffic control like they'd been doing at the peace 
marches all day. 

Things fell apart sometime after the sun set, and a se- 
ries of police vans in front of the park were overrun and de- 
stroyed. The crowd moved down Broadway but was blocked 
by dozens of cops who seemed prepared for this. They did 
their snatch-and-grabs and pepper spray routine, but the 
crowd was too mobile and too many things were happening 
at once. The police were misdeployed all over the city, just 
like the previous nights. 

In the middle of Broadway, someone with a hammer, or 
maybe a crowbar, or perhaps a pipe, snuck up on a whiteshirt 
and absolutely leveled them, swinging as hard as they could 
and smashing their helmet in before skipping away. The cop 
was dazed, likely concussed, but seemed fine otherwise. A 
nearby cop panicked and pulled his gun, swinging it around 
and aiming it at random groups of protesters for a few sec- 
onds until another whiteshirt came in and told him to put 
it away. 

Rowdy teens were still flowing like water out of Union 
Square, overwhelming police at every intersection. Marked 
police vans hidden on side streets were smashed with skate- 
boards or bricks or metal pipes from construction sites or 
whatever tools were around, and then the fluid and fire 
would go in. Something went through a giant plate-glass cvs 
window on the ground floor of the New School building, 
site of the old university occupations. Teens were running 
inside and grabbing candy, tossing bulk boxes of Snickers 
bars into 5th Avenue for everyone to take. Interests aligned, 
Black youth and the slightly-less-Black militants seamlessly 
worked together as they made their way around Manhattan. 

The march snaked north, smashing blocks upon blocks 
of corporate storefronts and discovering more cop cars on 
side streets to light up. The crowd was somehow growing as 
it swarmed through Midtown and Times Square, the Nypp's 
hallowed turf, centerpiece of the city's magical 1990s crime 


32 





turnaround. The usual counterterrorist officers holding as- 
sault rifles, paid six figures a year to stand around all day and 
pose for photos with tourists, had retreated a block or two 
away from the oncoming crowd, just like all the other cops. 
The flagship Best Buy was ransacked. Someone was 
standing at the broken window with an armful of iPads, 
tossing boxes out into the crowd like a free t-shirt giveaway. 
Everyone was overjoyed, literally glowing—some of the iPads 
were floor models that still had their screens lit up. 
Meanwhile, a large contingent down at Union Square 
had managed to circumvent police lines and continue south. 
Some of them were now in the process of cleaning out hun- 
dreds of thousands of dollars worth of luxury goods from 
stores all over Soho. Others had come and planned ahead: 
they parked their cars down the block, popped the trunks, 
ran in with friends and grabbed as much they could hold, 
jogging back and stuffing their cars full. Someone explained 
that the cars had been rented out-of-state with scammed 
credit card numbers, which explained why they didn't care 
about vehicle identifications or leaving their keys in the igni- 
tions. At one point a running Mercedes was abandoned in 


ik i if , | a 
“ee ll Pe a 
ORDSTROM F@ == DUAN? gale: ij). 





34 


the middle of the street after police showed up and started 
chasing away looters on foot. 

The media focused on the high-end fashion, but people 
were also going for functional goods. Looters streamed out 
of REI with two-thousand-dollar mountain bikes and rode 
them away, fiddling with the gear shifters as they spun their 
pedals. Assembled skateboards were grabbed and immedi- 
ately made of use for both transport and destruction. Every 
cvs was hit; that was just a given at this point. Prescription 
bottles of Viagra were left scattered outside a Duane Reade 
along with a pile of other items from the store's pharmacy. 

Someone went out of their way to smash the elevated 
windows of the Supreme store. All the racks and shelves 
inside had been cleared out in advance because they knew 
the looters would be coming for them. And yet, teamwork 
got everyone through the building's freight entrance doors 
around the side and the entirety of the stock room was lib- 
erated. At Flight Club, another popular streetwear store, a 
crowd had nearly gotten past the wooden boards and metal 
roll gate when an unmarked police suv careened toward the 
crowd out of nowhere, hopping the curb and obliterating 





35 


some historical monument outside the church next door as 
shoppers scattered. 

Just like the police, all the local beat reporters who prided 
themselves on catching and exposing criminals either could 
not keep up or were simply too scared to venture into the 
free zone. All their details about this phase of the riots would 
be gleaned from unreliable police sources, social media chat- 
ter, or wealthy Soho residents interviewed the morning after. 
The only place these reporters felt safe was behind police 
lines, so there would be no chance that they would get this 
story right, since there were no police lines anymore. One 
crime reporter posted shaky cell phone video shot from the 
inside of a moving car. Not very intrepid. 

Watching large swaths of wealthy Manhattan island ced- 
ed to Black youth and whisking around the neighborhood 
inside a tornado zone of felonies was interesting enough, but 
it soon became repetitive, politically speaking. Some loot- 
ers were not happy about all the fires getting in the way of 
their work. This crowd had little interest in confrontation 
and property destruction, despite the anti-authoritarian 
Purge-like aura conveyed on social media. Instead of girding 
for a standoff, everyone would sprint away whenever some- 
one shouted about the cops coming. It was understandable. 
Felony burglary charges were serious and they wouldn't im- 
mediately get dismissed like all the disorderly conduct arrests 
at the normal protests. 

As looting goes, it was more of a business venture than 
a personal shopping trip. No one was checking sizes as they 
cleared the racks, and the first things people went for were 
the registers or the MacBooks stashed in the back offices. 
It was a simple redistribution of wealth, though it did look 
kind of silly in the process. People were waddling around try- 
ing to hold ridiculous amounts of goods in their arms, they 
were accidentally running into each other slapstick style, 
they were ripping clothing off mannequin bodies, pulling 
sets of rolling luggage behind them, walking around with 


36 


contractor-grade trash bags thrown over their shoulders like 
Santa Claus. People looted the Lego store. The streets were 
littered with Viagra and candy. 

It was obvious that cops had been instructed to keep far 
away and out of sight, probably in order to not increase ten- 
sions in a battle they were already seriously losing. The peo- 
ple who were still out that late were pretty focused on their 
work at that particular moment, anyway. No one was going 
to be spontaneously storming a police precinct or trying to 
flip over a police van tonight; their arms were full. 


JUNE I 


Py’ he mayor announced a state of emergency and in- 
} stituted an 11 pm curfew with a complete ban on 
vehicular traffic in Manhattan below 96th Street, but 
it was clear that there were scores of people who didn't care 
about what he or the governor or the president or the me- 
dia or what “community leaders” were saying or what flimsy 
reforms they had begun promising. The ones that did care 
held their orderly demonstrations earlier in the day, behaving 
nicely, holding signs, giving quotes denouncing the looting 








37 


and property destruction. Their condemnations may have 
had caveats about riots being the language of the unheard, 
but the main thing the media and politicians needed were 
quotes that separated the agitators from the legitimate pro- 
testers who only wanted their voices heard and who were 
making sensible demands, none of which included the Nypp 
sucking their dicks: the impossible demand. 

Activists were now even colonizing the traditional “NYPD 
SUCK MY DICK” chant, keeping the cadence but changing 
the words to “NYPD TAKE A KNEE.” Some whiteshirted 
NypD leaders obliged, to the media's delight. Holding hands 
and raising fists with the highest-ranking uniformed mem- 
ber of the New York Police Department and surrounded by 
a wall of photojournalists, the entire moment had been or- 
chestrated by mainstream “violence interrupter” activists af 
ter people had begun throwing plastic water bottles at police 
during a standoff in Washington Square Park. A trend of 
cops facing off against protesters and kneeling together in 
solidarity had spread throughout the country and the media 
was loving it. It was about as meaningful as a Pepsi commer- 
cial. A local journalist saw the first kneeling whiteshirt shrug 
to a colleague and say, “they did it in Queens...I mean, if it 
stops the riots...” 

Night fell and things seemed to be picking up, but it was 
different. Protest activity more neatly converged in Lower 
Manhattan and all the pockets of resistance that had been 
appearing everywhere simultaneously the past few days—the 
hectic scanner traffic announcing a disorderly group of 500 
in Union Square, disorderly group of 100 in Flatbush, order- 
ly group of 1,000 at Barclays, 300 disorderly in Harlem— 
seemed to be cooling off. Stores in Soho had been cleared out 
and heavily locked down, with more cops and more private 
security guards milling around storefronts with additional 
wooden fortifications covering the windows. 

Youth were hanging out around Union Square, as usu- 
al, and some crews ventured about, swinging skateboards 


38 





through random windows and grabbing things nobody 
needed. Meanwhile, a big rally in front of police headquar- 
ters in Manhattan turned into a march and headed uptown, 
gradually shedding the less militant along the way. Corporate 
storefronts were getting shattered, but not without some vo- 
cal disagreement from some in the crowd. Police cars were 
being quietly tagged, not spectacularly totaled. 

The march strolled through Soho without much fanfare 
and approached the Astor Place Starbucks, almost certainly 
the most frequently smashed storefront in contemporary 
New York City protest history. A young Black teenager in 
the march exclaimed to a friend with a mixture of confusion 
and disappointment, “it's all white niggas.” It was true, rela- 
tively. Someone clad in black darted out from the crowd and 
smashed the window. 

The march continued on and fragmented somewhere 
around Herald Square and spread into Midtown once again, 
most of the politically-oriented protesters moving on as the 
looting began. A small group broke into Macy's and got 
themselves all arrested. That made headlines, but the seri- 
ous looting had moved on to the Grand Concourse in the 
Bronx, which was mostly small independent shops. The city 





40 


and real estate developers had been trying to gentrify the 
neighborhood for years, but still, it was a tougher dynam- 
ic to explain to people than the previous nights. Teenagers 
running around Manhattan grabbing cash and candy bars 
and fighting the police made much more sense and captured 
the essence of the outrage much better than organized crews 
pulling up in trucks and ripping entire arm machines out of 
the ground. A video of a Bronx cop getting hit by a speeding 
car and flying into the air like a ragdoll circulated on social 
media, but it looked like a genuine accident. 


JUNE 2 







v hings were still generally out of control, so the may- 
; or bumped the curfew up to 8 pm. This actually 

&=” brought more protesters out, specifically the non- 
militant white ones who felt like they had to do something 
to support the cause beyond just posting symbolic black 
squares on J/nstagram. With the curfew in place, now all it 
took to perform a heroic act of civil disobedience in solidar- 
ity with Black People was to simply be outside at night. Ey- 
erything was more organized and controlled, even coherent 
in its demands. There were more megaphones, more signs, 
more boring chants, more social justice activists, more peace 
policing, more predictability. Thousands gathered in an or- 
derly fashion to shout slogans at an empty skyscraper with 
the words “Trump Tower” on it. 

As their bosses eagerly took knees and hugged Black-led 
protest leaders across all five boroughs, the uncontrollable 
elements of the crowds faded away amid the new endless re- 
joinders to not “provoke” the cops or “take the bait.” The 
Black protesters who spoke out against the cop-hugging were 
scolded far worse than the non-Black people who did, ensur- 
ing that the protests would be as colorless and obedient as 


possible. 


4I 


The mayor and nypp leadership had been facing harsh 
criticism for their inability to stop the looting, so all officers 
were put on 12-hour shifts and given the go-ahead to make 
mass arrests, even at the orderly marches. Police returned to 
their usual crowd control tactics, breaking up peaceful gath- 
erings and piling on top of anyone they could grab. 

Angry, marginalized New Yorkers looting 5th Avenue 
certainly looked bad for the city, but helmeted cops march- 
ing down 5th Avenue indiscriminately swinging night sticks 
and beating up nonthreatening white people might have 
looked even worse. With more reporters and cameras around 
to capture the violence, media uproar and politician outrage 
over the mass arrests and protest brutality became the lead- 
ing story. 

Racial, political, and even gender divisions within the 
crowds were becoming increasingly stark. Random grift- 
ers with mysterious backgrounds and no previous interest 
in social justice kept showing up to protests wearing signa- 
ture clothing and carrying distinctive props. They climbed 
onto tall platforms and raised their fists and summoned the 
mild amount of charisma needed to convince large groups 
of white people and journalists that they spoke for an en- 
tire “community,” if not a whole generation. The more they 
spoke, the more the grifters' motives started to show. But no 
one was about to shout down a strong Black woman yelling 
clichés about justice and love and change, even when they 
ended their speeches by telling everyone to follow them on 
Instagram, spelling out their handles, letter by letter, through 
their megaphones. 

Protest leaders took thousands of fresh faces who had 
never been to a demonstration before and led them directly 
into corridors of waiting cops and on long marches to “shut 
down” far-off highways and desolate bridge roadways, all eas- 
ily handled with minimal police resources. 

The big march this evening started in Brooklyn and was 
led onto the Manhattan Bridge, but the cops over on the 


42 





Manhattan end were tired and wanted their overtime pay 
without having to actually walk around following a march, 
so they forced everyone to turn around and go back to Brook- 
lyn. The cops back on the Brooklyn side were also tired, so 
they turned the march back the other way. Thousands of 
people were now stranded on the bridge with nowhere to go 
and nothing to do. 

After about an hour, Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio- 
Cortez announced that she was on her way from Queens 


43 


to personally broker a deal with the Nypp and avoid a mass 
arrest situation. The Brooklyn cops eventually relented be- 
fore she showed up, allowing the crowd to pass so long as 
they promised to end the march and disperse. It was nearly 
midnight and everyone was exhausted. The march split up 
and the protesters all went back home to whichever part of 
Brooklyn they were gentrifying. 


JUNE 3 


FY housands were still showing up for rallies and march- 
es across Manhattan and select parts of Brooklyn, 
” but they were not very organic nor were they leader- 
less. Protesters who violated the 8 pm curfew continued to 
be beaten and arrested by the hundreds, the overwhelming 
majority of them white. There were plenty of police brutal- 
ity media moments as lumbering cops beat their way into 
maximum overtime hours, but, like most caught-on-camera 
protest repression, the outrage was fleeting. It may have been 
novel for the people getting beat up by cops for the first time 
in their lives, but the rest of the city seemed largely inured 
to NYPD protest violence, nodding their heads as the mayor 
called the videos “troubling” and promised to look into it. 





JUNE 4 


small coalition of radical affinity groups had been 
3 hyping a march in the South Bronx that was to be 
oY explicitly militant and anti-police, circulating digi- 
tal flyers with cop cars on fire and all. Past actions from this 
self-described “formation” had gone fine, despite no one ever 
lighting a cop car on fire at any of them. Unlike the rioting 
and the more spontaneous looting and property destruction 
a few days earlier, NypD knew about this one in advance and 
had ample time to draw up a battle plan along with a pr 
strategy to handle the inevitable backlash that comes with 
mass arrest events. 





44 


The Bronx organizers and all the people who parachuted 
in, plus some local residents and delivery people who had the 
misfortune of being in the vicinity, were all kettled, beaten, 
and arrested almost immediately after the march began. Hu- 
man Rights Watch published a detailed investigative report 
about the brutal arrests a few months later, which will be 
useful for when the United Nations extradites Nypp leader- 
ship to the Hague and puts them on trial for violating inter- 
national human rights laws. The report is a depressing read 
best described as police brutality porn, erotica for cops who 
get turned on by beating up protesters, or for social justice 
people who like to revel in their own defeats. 

The icing on this particular cake was that the whiteshirt 
who oversaw the Bronx operation was the same high-ranking 
chief who had taken a knee in Washington Square Park a few 
days before. There was never an official racial breakdown of 
the hundreds of arrestees, but the South Bronx is 3% white 
and the share of white people arrested that night was much, 
much greater than 3%. The critical elements from the first 
few days of the uprising—poc youth and unaffiliated “Black 
proletarians’—had barely shown up. The “rrp formation” 
fell apart a few weeks later, publicly imploding in a flurry of 
official statements that no one read. 


JUNE AND BEYOND 






’ housands of people, mostly white and mostly led by 
; a small handful of Black grifters of various activist 
”and non-activist origins, continued to walk around 
in peaceful, orderly marches in defiance of the curfew. The 
combination of aggressive police response and endless boring 
demonstrations even allowed the mayor to end the curfew 
one day ahead of schedule. Nypp only made a small number 
of protest arrests over the rest of the month, mostly snatch- 
and-grabs whenever things appeared to be getting disorderly, 
or if the cops got bored. 


45 


= NEW YORK POST. Q 


NYPD lieutenant apologizes for 
kneeling alongside George 
Floyd protesters 


By Tina Moore, Amanda Woods and Aaron Feis 


June 11, 2020 | 11:17am | Updated 





NYPD Lt. Robert Cattani, takes a knee during a demonstration in 
Foley Square May 31, and tends to an injured cop later that 
evening. 


A Manhattan NYPD lieutenant has apologized to his fellow 
department members for taking a knee alongside George 
Floyd protesters — telling them that “the cop in me wants 
to kick my own ass.” 


A couple of nonprofit organizations, one of them a 
Democratic Party pac, established an occupation of City 
Hall Park that lasted a single month before flaming out, ac- 
companied by—what else—an official statement posted on 
Instagram. Nine years earlier, Zuccotti Park had to be vio- 
lently cleared out in the dead of night to end Occupy Wall 
Street. This occupation, in a much more visible and far less 
isolated location, was tolerated by the city and left to quietly 
self-destruct on its own. The uprising in New York was over. 


46 







Se <S 


Ngamety he arc of the moral universe that bends toward jus- 
Bes tice might be long, but riots compress time and can 
shorten the distance between us and justice. Across a 
few days in New York in the plague year 2020, the arc of the 
moral universe bent through 292 cops, 303 police vehicles, 
450 capitalist storefronts, and millions of dollars’ worth of 
property and goods. 

As the riots recede into memory and the political reforms 
all fail, the NypD continues to innovate new and expensive 
techniques of repression. More glitter than guns, every dol- 
lar spent in the service of keeping everything the way it is. If 
there was any tactical lesson to be learned, it was that rioting 
is timeless, tried and true. Even the most sophisticated and 
overfunded police forces can't put them down on their own. 

New reform efforts mint new laws and new laws mint 
new injustices. Policing in America was invented to protect 
private property: slave patrols in the South and cargo ship- 
ment protection in the North. The ostensible abolishment 
of slavery was achieved through unimaginable violence in a 
war spurred by a Supreme Court decision to formally legalize 
slavery. With the end of the Civil War came new laws that 
created new and novel forms of oppression. Sharecropping, 
Jim Crow segregation, poll taxes, and the rise of the Ku Klux 
Klan and its kin filled the gaps left by the end of slavery. As 
each new piece of legislation and executive action and consti- 
tutional amendment promised to finally grant Black people 
their right to exist, Black death remained enshrined in law 
with updated language to fit the era. 

The government passed countless Civil Rights Acts over 
the next century, each with its own caveats. The big one at 
the end of the 1960s, hastily signed into law during a period 
of nationwide rioting following MLK's assassination, out- 
lawed housing discrimination while expanding the criminal- 
ization of Black political speech: first and foremost, inciting 
to riot. After the George Floyd uprising, federal prosecutors 
charged scores of people using the anti-riot laws written into 


47 


the Civil Rights Act of 1968, the crowning achievement of 
the nonviolent civil rights movement. 

Maybe nothing ever lasts and the police didn't get de- 
funded and the whole thing was destined to fail, but at least 
we tried, and at least we failed better than we did the last 
time. In the end, a new, small generation of militant anti- 
authoritarians was probably born, maybe. The aftereffects in 
our small corner could be like those of Occupy Wall Street 
or the antiglobalization movement, but less white, more 
neighborhood-oriented, and this time squarely aimed at po- 
lice and the carceral state, not nebulous corporations and bu- 
reaucratic free trade agreements. 

After all, the laws that gave rise to those corporations and 
the policies written into those trade agreements are enforced 
under the threat of violence, economic or otherwise. Injus- 
tice is by definition written into law, so effective resistance to 
injustice will always appear in the form of lawbreaking. Poli- 
ticians and corporations might be the ones writing the laws, 
but the laws are ultimately always protected and enforced 
here, in the streets, by the police. 

Capitalism is killing you, the criminal justice system is 
killing you, the misery of everyday life is killing you, some- 
thing outside of you is killing you, and whatever it is, the 
police are its first line of defense. That other world you think 
is possible, the truth you want to believe is out there, it's 
located somewhere in the darkness just beyond the cops. For 
those with nothing left to lose, for those who barely even 
want to be here, now is your best chance to get out before 
you give up, and the only way out is always through them. 


48 





NYPD NEWS @ 
@NYPDnews 


At least 292 NYPD members of service have been 
injured in the course of their public safety duties during 
these demonstrations. 


Officers have been physically assaulted, struck by 
vehicles, hit with projectiles. 





Injured Police Offi¢ers 


11:10 PM - Jun 6, 2020 

